---
layout: post
title: "Using git subtree with gh-pages"
date: "2015-05-16"
categories:
  - development
tags:
  - git
---

I recently switched to using [Hugo](http://www.gohugo.io) to generate this site and needed a strategy to publish it. Previously I was using [Octopress](http://www.octopress.org) which has scripts for managing the gh-pages branch automatically. The documentation on gohugo.io shows a workflow that uses `git subtree`, a tool I knew about but had never actually used before. I found the [tutorial](http://gohugo.io/tutorials/github-pages-blog#configure-git-workflow:fcefb200141ace3e7bfd6542457b7a72) on the gohugo.io page to be confusing. Here, I describe the approach I used instead.

<!--more-->

My goal is to have a clean `gh-pages` branch that contains the minimum content it needs to have a meaningful history, and a `master` branch that makes sense.

The first thing to do is generate the site in `public/` by running `hugo` while on `master` and in the root directory of the repository:

    $ git checkout master
    $ hugo

At this point, create an orphaned `gh-pages` branch:

    $ git checkout --orphan gh-pages

*Note: the `gh-pages` branch won't show up in `git branch` yet. Don't worry about that.*

If you check `git status` you'll see a bunch of staged files–the contents that were in `master`. Unstage these with `git reset`:

    $ git reset .

Now everything that was staged will be untracked. Clean up those untracked files with `git clean`, &nbsp;**excluding public**:

    $ git clean --force -d --exclude public

Now you should see `public/` as the only untracked directory.

Of course, GitHub Pages wants the content that's currently in `public/` as the root of the `gh-pages` branch. Let's make that happen. Copy the contents of `public/` to the current directory with the tool of your choice, like `mv`:

    $ mv public/* .

At this point you can safely get rid of `public/`, &nbsp;so run `git clean` again, this time only including `public`:

    $ git clean --force -d public # or just rm -r public

Now you're in a position to add everything that was in `public/`, and is now in the current directory, to make the initial commit. I used "Generate site" as the message:

    $ git add .
    $ git commit -m "Generate site"

*Note: Only after making the above commit will the `gh-pages` branch appear in `git branch`.*

Now push the `gh-pages` branch to origin:

    $ git push -u origin gh-pages:gh-pages

At this point your GitHub Pages site will be generated by GitHub, and will be live shortly.

The following steps are what we'll do to make re-generating and updating the site an easy affair. First, check out `master`:

    $ git checkout master

Now that the branch is on the remote, we'll add it as a subtree under `public/` on `master`. Be sure to replace the `<placeholder>` with your own repo:

    $ git subtree add --prefix public <repo_url> gh-pages

If you `ls public` you'll see the content generated by hugo, and if you `git log -2` you'll see the commit you made on `gh-pages` in addition to the commit that added the subtree to `master`. Push `master` and you're all set:

    $ git push origin master:master

Now each time you update something in `content/`:

 * commit the changes to `content/` on `master`
 * re-generate the site with `hugo`
 * commit the changes to `public/` 
 * push the changes to the subtree (which will update `gh-pages`)
 * push the changes to `master`

As so:

    $ git add content
    $ git commit -m "Added insightful post on the social lives of kittens"
    $ hugo
    $ git add public
    $ git commit -m "Regenerate site"
    $ git subtree push --prefix public <repo_url> gh-pages
    $ git push origin master:master

Now when you look at the history of `gh-pages`, &nbsp;all you'll see are the generate/regenerate commits:

    $ git fetch gh-pages
    $ git log gh-pages
    102c92b 6 minutes ago Kris Hicks | Regenerate site
    af759b6 10 minutes ago Kris Hicks | Regenerate site
    69045e6 2 hours ago Kris Hicks | Generate site

Whereas on `master` you'll see the changes to the content, in addition to the changes on the subtree:

    $ git log master
    1df64be 7 minutes ago Kris Hicks | Regenerate site
    d244956 8 minutes ago Kris Hicks | Update phone-interviews post with HN link
    66c4e29 11 minutes ago Kris Hicks | Regenerate site
    bea8982 11 minutes ago Kris Hicks | Update rerere post
    456c79e 14 minutes ago Kris Hicks | Add static/
    cfb98dc 18 minutes ago Kris Hicks | Add 'public/' from commit '69045e6db8a929e0476c7553917981e3c9545c4e'
    69045e6 2 hours ago Kris Hicks | Generate site
    daf97fc 3 hours ago Kris Hicks | Add keybase.txt
    483bfec 3 hours ago Kris Hicks | Add CNAME

This makes more sense to me than the approach listed on the gohugo.io tutorial, which leaves you with weird merge commits and messy history otherwise.
